 agent report:

---
 spec-driver sync and complete delta overwrite manually-set requirement statuses

  Summary

  When a requirement's coverage_entries contains any entry with status: deferred, sync (and
   complete delta, which calls sync internally) automatically downgrades the requirement's
  status from active to in-progress. This overwrite occurs silently and repeatedly — any
  manual correction is lost on the next sync/complete invocation.

  Steps to Reproduce

  1. Add coverage entries to a requirement in the PROD spec's verification.coverage block,
  including one with status: deferred:
  - artefact: VT-013
    kind: VT
    requirement: PROD-001.FR-008
    status: verified
  - artefact: VH-001
    kind: VH
    requirement: PROD-001.FR-008
    status: verified
  - artefact: VH-004
    kind: VH
    requirement: PROD-001.FR-008
    status: deferred
  2. Set the requirement status to active in the registry (requirements.yaml).
  3. Run spec-driver sync or spec-driver complete delta DE-XXX.
  4. Observe: the requirement status in requirements.yaml has been overwritten to
  in-progress.
  5. Manually fix it back to active.
  6. Run sync again — overwritten again.

  Expected Behaviour

  A single deferred coverage entry among otherwise verified entries should not force the
  requirement status to in-progress. The requirement is implemented and verified by
  multiple artefacts; the deferred VH is a known gap (in this case, a third-party editor
  with flaky --wait support), not a signal that implementation is incomplete.

  Possible expectations (any would resolve the issue):
  - Option A: Treat deferred as neutral — don't count it against the requirement. Derive
  status from non-deferred entries only.
  - Option B: Don't auto-derive requirement status from coverage at all. Let the agent/user
   set it and leave it alone.
  - Option C: Derive status but allow an explicit override flag (e.g., status_override:
  active) that sync respects.

  Actual Behaviour

  Sync derives requirement status using a rule like "if any coverage entry is not verified,
   downgrade to in-progress". This makes deferred functionally equivalent to failing or
  planned from the status derivation perspective.

  Impact

  - Agent workflow friction: Every sync or delta completion requires a manual post-fix to
  the registry. Agents that don't know about this will leave requirements in incorrect
  in-progress state.
  - Closure ceremony: complete delta calls sync internally, so the overwrite happens as
  part of the closure flow — exactly when you want statuses to be correct.
  - Validator contradiction: After sync sets in-progress, spec-driver validate warns that
  the requirement has coverage evidence but an unexpected status, recommending it be set to
   active — the opposite of what sync just did.

  Workaround

  Set the requirement status back to active after each sync/complete call. Alternatively,
  omit the deferred VH from coverage_entries entirely and document it only in prose (notes
  field or the spec's verification block).

  Environment

  spec-driver invoked via spec-driver (Python/uv). Observed during DE-003 closure on
  2026-03-05.

❯ were you using the skill 'close-change'?

● Yes. I invoked it and followed its process (pre-check → dry-run → complete → post-check).
   The sync-overwrite issue hit during step 3 (complete delta), then again when I manually
  fixed the status and re-ran sync during post-checks.
